Adding compile time and runtime properties for usm allocations (#5656)
intel/llvm: sycl/doc/extensions/proposed/sycl_ext_oneapi_usm_properties.asciidoc

Further, this will also be used by the runtime for allocation of the memory.

== Notice

Copyright (c) 2021-2022 Intel Corporation.  All rights reserved.

== Status

Working Draft

This is a proposed extension specification, intended to gather community
feedback. Interfaces defined in this specification may not be implemented yet
or may be in a preliminary state. The specification itself may also change in
incompatible ways before it is finalized. Shipping software products should not
rely on APIs defined in this specification.

== Version

Revision: 1

== Contributors

Abhishek Tiwari, Intel +
Aditi Kumaraswamy, Intel +
Gregory Lueck, Intel +
Jason Sewall, Intel +
Jessica Davies, Intel +
Joe Garvey, Intel +
Mike Kinsner, Intel +
Sherry Yuan, Intel

== Dependencies

This extension is written against the SYCL 2020 specification, Revision 4 and the following extensions:

- link:sycl_ext_oneapi_properties.asciidoc[sycl_ext_oneapi_properties]

=== Examples

The properties can be used in the usm allocation as follows:

[source,c++]
----

using namespace sycl::ext::oneapi;

> annotated_ptr<int, property_list_t<sycl::ext::intel::buffer_location<1>>> data_v = malloc_device<int, property_list_t<sycl::ext::intel::buffer_location<1>>>(N, q);

Author: Possible improvements 1: is it possible to make it less verbose, i.e combine the runtime and compile time property, and pass both as template arg of annotated_ptr?

Or is it possible to directly pass [sycl_ext_oneapi_properties](https://github.com/intel/llvm/blob/1df003896532b3aa4454ea5c061eaf9b25ada045/sycl/doc/extensions/proposed/sycl_ext_oneapi_properties.asciidoc) into the function parameter, and then pass it as one of the template arguments for annotated ptr?

Author: Hopefully a user could do something like the following:
```
auto data = malloc_device<int>(N, q, property_list{my_runtime_property{4}, sycl::ext::intel::buffer_location_v<1>});
// data is of type annotated_ptr<int, property_list_t<sycl::ext::intel::buffer_location<1>>>
```
The proposal could be:
```
template <typename T>
annotated_ptr<T, PropertyListT> malloc_device(
    size_t Count, const queue &Q, const sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental::properties &PropList = {},
    const detail::code_location CodeLoc = detail::code_location::current()) {
  annotated_ptr<T, PropList> addr(malloc_device<T>(Count, Q.get_device(), Q.get_context(), PropList,
                          CodeLoc));
  return addr;
}
```
I don't think `sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental::properties` support this kind of usage?

or
```
template <typename T>
annotated_ptr<T, PropertyListT> malloc_device(
    size_t Count, const queue &Q, const sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental::properties &PropList = {},
    const detail::code_location CodeLoc = detail::code_location::current()) {
  if (buffer loc is property of PropList)
    annotated_ptr<T, sycl::ext::intel::buffer_location<1>> addr(malloc_device<T>(Count, Q.get_device(), Q.get_context(), PropList, CodeLoc));
  return addr;
}
```
But it has scalability concern, what if there are other properties?

Author: Base on: https://github.com/intel/llvm/blob/sycl/sycl/doc/extensions/proposed/sycl_ext_oneapi_kernel_properties.asciidoc#adding-a-property-list-to-a-kernel-launch

another potential template is

```cpp
 template <typename T, typename PropertyList>
annotated_ptr<T, PropertyListT> annotated_malloc_device(
    size_t Count, const queue &Q, PropertyList properties,
    const detail::code_location CodeLoc = detail::code_location::current()) {
    annotated_ptr<T, PropertyList> ptr(addr);
    return addr;
}

sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental::properties properties{sycl::ext::oneapi::buffer_location<2>, runtime_prop(3)};
auto data = malloc_device<int>(N, q, properties);
// data is of type annotated_ptr<int, property_list_t<sycl::ext::intel::buffer_location<1>>>
```

Not sure of correctness yet.

    const detail::code_location CodeLoc = detail::code_location::current()) {
  ...
}

template <typename T, typename PropertyListT = property_list<>>
annotated_ptr<T, PropertyListT> malloc_host(
    size_t Count, const context &Ctxt, const sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental::properties &PropList = {},
    const detail::code_location CodeLoc = detail::code_location::current()) {
  ...
}

} // namespace sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental
----

The same setup is applied to other variant of the function signatures.

Compile time properties can be pass into runtime properties within the allocation function.

The table below describes the effects of associating each properties with each malloc function.

|===
|Property|Description

|`buffer_location`
|The `buffer_location` property adds the requirement that the memory must be
 allocated to the correct device global memory location as defined in `SYCL_INTEL_buffer_location` extension. 
 With `malloc_device` the returned device pointer must be in the target global memory.
 with `malloc_shared`, compiler must implicitly migrate to the target device global memory.

>  with `malloc_host`, memory must be at the target device global memory when explicitly migrated.

Author: Maybe remove malloc_host, do nothing.

alloc on a host global mem id,

do not use device global memory terminology. "specified memory"

= sycl_ext_oneapi_usm_properties
:source-highlighter: coderay
:coderay-linenums-mode: table

// This section needs to be after the document title.
:doctype: book
:toc2:
:toc: left
:encoding: utf-8
:lang: en

:blank: pass:[ +]

// Set the default source code type in this document to C++,
// for syntax highlighting purposes.  This is needed because
// docbook uses c++ and html5 uses cpp.
:language: {basebackend@docbook:c++:cpp}

== Introduction
IMPORTANT: This specification is a draft.

NOTE: Khronos(R) is a registered trademark and SYCL(TM) and SPIR(TM) are
trademarks of The Khronos Group Inc.  OpenCL(TM) is a trademark of Apple Inc.
used by permission by Khronos.

> This extension introduces an alternative way to pass both runtime and compile time properties into USM malloc APIs.

Reviewer: This is a vague.  Let's be more direct and state:
```suggestion
This extension adds properties support (as defined in the sycl_ext_oneapi_properties extension) to the USM malloc APIs.  This allows the malloc calls to accept both run time and compile time properties.  
```

> `malloc_device`, `malloc_host`, `malloc_shared` take the properties, pass runtime properties onto runtime libraries and create annotated_ptr base on compile-time properties.

Reviewer: I wouldn't mention that run time properties are passed to the runtime; these are literally runtime APIs so that's self evident.  Returning an annotated_ptr is a change in API though relative to the other malloc overloads and is the vehicle through which this information makes it to the compiler so it makes sense to mention it.

Author: Thanks for the suggestions! now phrased as:

`malloc_device`, `malloc_host`, `malloc_shared` take the properties, and return an annotated_ptr that carries the passed in compile-time properties.

> The goal of these changes is to enable information about properties to propagate to the device compiler and thereby enable additional optimization of kernel code. Further, this will also be used by the runtime for allocation in the correct target memory.

Reviewer: I would drop the second sentence because (1) run time properties can already be passed to the runtime using the existing malloc overloads so something like this can already be accomplished with the existing API and (2) per my earlier comment, I don't think this extension should mention buffer_location.

== Notice

Copyright (c) 2021-2022 Intel Corporation.  All rights reserved.

== Status

Working Draft

This is a proposed extension specification, intended to gather community
feedback. Interfaces defined in this specification may not be implemented yet
or may be in a preliminary state. The specification itself may also change in
incompatible ways before it is finalized. Shipping software products should not
rely on APIs defined in this specification.

== Version

Revision: 1

== Contributors

Abhishek Tiwari, Intel +
Aditi Kumaraswamy, Intel +
Gregory Lueck, Intel +
Jason Sewall, Intel +
Jessica Davies, Intel +
Joe Garvey, Intel +
Mike Kinsner, Intel +
Sherry Yuan, Intel

== Dependencies

This extension is written against the SYCL 2020 specification, Revision 4 and the following extensions:

> - link:sycl_ext_oneapi_properties.asciidoc[sycl_ext_oneapi_properties]

Reviewer: The link is broken.  The spec was moved from "proposed" to "experimental" recently so that's probably why.

auto data2 = sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental::malloc_device<int>(N, q, properties);
// data2 is of type annotated_ptr<int*, property_list_t<some_compile_time_prop<1>>>

sycl::queue q;
q.parallel_for(range<1>(N), [=] (id<1> i){
  data2[i] *= 2;
}).wait();
----

=== New USM allocation APIs

[source,c++]
----
namespace sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental {

// Available only when is_property_list<PropertyListT>::value is true
template <typename T = void*, typename PropertyListT = property_list_t<>>
annotated_ptr<T, PropertyListT> malloc_device(
    size_t Count, const queue &Q, PropertyListT &PropList) {
  ...
}

// Available only when is_property_list<PropertyListT>::value is true
template <typename T = void*, typename PropertyListT = property_list_t<>>
annotated_ptr<T, PropertyListT> malloc_shared(
    size_t Count, const queue &Q, PropertyListT &PropList) {
  ...
}

// Available only when is_property_list<PropertyListT>::value is true
template <typename T = void*, typename PropertyListT = property_list_t<>>
annotated_ptr<T, PropertyListT> malloc_host(
    size_t Count, const context &Ctxt, PropertyListT &PropList) {
  ...
}

} // namespace sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental
----

> The same setup is applied to other overloads of malloc APIs.

Reviewer 2: Don't say this.  Instead, list every API this extension introduces.

> Compile time properties can be pass into runtime properties within the allocation function.

Reviewer 2: What does this  mean?

Author: I have removed this sentence given it is more of an implementation detail specific to subset of the properties.

template <typename T = void, typename PropertyListT>
annotated_ptr<T, PropertyListT> malloc_device(
    size_t Count, const queue &Q, PropertyListT &PropList) {
  ...
}

template <typename T = void, typename PropertyListT>
annotated_ptr<T, PropertyListT> malloc_device(
    size_t Count, const device &Dev, const context &Ctxt, PropertyListT &PropList) {
  ...
}

template <typename T = void, typename PropertyListT>
annotated_ptr<T, PropertyListT> malloc_shared(
    size_t Count, const queue &Q, PropertyListT &PropList) {
  ...
}

template <typename T = void, typename PropertyListT>
annotated_ptr<T, PropertyListT> malloc_shared(
    size_t Count, const device &Dev, const context &Ctxt, PropertyListT &PropList) {
  ...
}

template <typename T = void, typename PropertyListT>
annotated_ptr<T, PropertyListT> malloc_host(
    size_t Count, const context &Ctxt, PropertyListT &PropList) {
  ...
}

template <typename T = void, typename PropertyListT>
annotated_ptr<T, PropertyListT> malloc_host(
    size_t Count, const queue &Q, PropertyListT &PropList) {
  ...
}

} // namespace sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental
----

The same setup is applied to other overloads of malloc APIs.

> The returned `annotated_ptr` contains the USM pointers and the passed in compile-time properties to enable additional compiler optimizations.

Reviewer: This seems to imply that the annotated_ptr can only contain those properties passed in to the properties argument of the malloc call.  I can think of one situation where we don't want to be that restrictive: if we add a property to encode if an allocation is device vs. host vs. shared we'd like to be able to add that to the annotated_ptr based on which malloc call was made even if the user didn't put the associated property in the properties argument.
